1. Tsze-chang asked Confucius, saying, 'In what waynshould a person in authority act in order that he may conductngovernment properly?' The Master replied, 'Let him honour the fivenexcellent, and banish away the four bad, things;-- then may henconduct government properly.' Tsze-chang said, 'What are meant bynthe five excellent things?' The Master said, 'When the person innauthority is beneficent without great expenditure; when he laysntasks on the people without their repining; when he pursues whatnhe desires without being covetous; when he maintains a dignifiednease without being proud; when he is majestic without being fierce.'n 2. Tsze-chang said, 'What is meant by being beneficentnwithout great expenditure?' The Master replied, 'When the personnin authority makes more beneficial to the people the things fromnwhichnnthey naturally derive benefit;-- is not this being beneficent withoutngreat expenditure? When he chooses the labours which are proper,nand makes them labour on them, who will repine? When his desiresnare set on benevolent government, and he secures it, who willnaccuse him of covetousness? Whether he has to do with manynpeople or few, or with things great or small, he does not dare tonindicate any disrespect;-- is not this to maintain a dignified easenwithout any pride? He adjusts his clothes and cap, and throws andignity into his looks, so that, thus dignified, he is looked at withnawe;-- is not this to be majestic without being fierce?'n 3. Tsze-chang then asked, 'What are meant by the four badnthings?' The Master said, 'To put the people to death without havingninstructed them;-- this is called cruelty. To require from them,nsuddenly, the full tale of work, without having given themnwarning;-- this is called oppression. To issue orders as if withoutnurgency, at first, and, when the time comes, to insist on them withnseverity;-- this is called injury. And, generally, in the giving paynnor rewards to men, to do it in a stingy way;-- this is called actingnthe part of a mere official.'n CHAP III. 1. The Master said, 'Without recognising thenordinances of Heaven, it is impossible to be a superior man.n 2. 'Without an acquaintance with the rules of Propriety, it isnimpossible for the character to be established.n 3. 'Without knowing the force of words, it is impossible tonknow men.'nnnnnnEnd of Project Gutenberg Etext THE CHINESE CLASSICS (CONFUCIAN ANALECTS)nby James Leggen